---
date: 15/10/2023
description: An optimistic nihilist's views on human lives, and chaos theory.
title: Hunters, stories, and chaos
---

I came across a post on reddit a few days ago. It was about a 3000-year-old spear that archeologists found. The spear was in nearly mint condition, likely due to never being used for anything. This made me think about the hunter who crafted that spear. To them, this was likely not their first one, probably not the last one either. They were probably sitting around a fire, talking, telling others in their tribe about how their day went. Or maybe, they were sitting in their hut, humming a song to themselves, crafting this spear for someone else.

That person had a story to tell. It was the story of their life, how they had been brought up, how they had survived many winters, how they hunted animals, how they provided for their family, and how to them, all of this was just another day in the life. Just like how you and I have our own stories to tell, they too had theirs. And not every day was this exciting adventure for them, no, I'm sure they had their days off, maybe they liked to dance when no one was around, maybe there was a spot where they would go and see the sunrise with their partner.

_The most amazing thing about this person is, there probably has never existed another human that has lived the same life as them_. Earth as a whole is wildly non-deterministic. When it comes to day to day details of someone's life, **chaos** takes over. Two people may have similar stories, sure, but no two stories will ever be the same. Even a change as tiny as an extra water droplet falling on someone can wildly change the outcome of the future, that is what chaos is all about.

This also means that no matter what we do, we can never reveal someone's story. Unless someone takes the effort to record every detail of their lives, their story, their life is completely lost once they are no longer around to tell about it. Billions of amazing lives have been lost to time, of ordinary people. Those who went about their day-to-day business. Surviving, living their lives one day at a time. Most of these people had their happy days, maybe the day that they married the love of their life, maybe the day when their kids were born, or something as simple as a day of hard work ending with them sleeping in their own bed. Of course, like everyone else, they had their bad days as well, like the day their land went to war with another, or the day when their best friend went to live in another city.

All these people, the ones that we rarely ever think about led rich, vibrant lives. Each of them was an individual, with their own hobbies, their favorite music, their family and friends, and their own highs and lows. Maybe not everyone had a movie worthy story, but I'm willing to bet that it was fascinating to hear them tell about themselves. And that is true about our own lives as well. To us our own lives seem mundane, just living them out, like everyone else, trying to make sense of a world where predicting anything, even our own future, is impossible. But each of our lives have an amazing story contained within them, the story of how we once thought that there would be no tomorrow, yet for some reason, we found a way to keep going. The story of how there came a tomorrow, and the day after that, and the one after that. The story of how we lived through some of the happiest days of our lives, and how more are ahead of us.

This is the same story that each and every one of us lives through. However, just like snowflakes that are born out of chaos, no two stories are the same. Each individual goes through their best and worst days.
Each person feels that the world is going to end. No one ever knows how the day is going to turn out, the only way to find out is to keep going, that's what we've been doing for thousands of years.
